doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/application/overview.md, before:

# Application for Login and Resources

In order to use the ZIH systems installed at ZIH, a project application form has to be filled in.
The HPC project manager should hold a professorship (university) or head a research group. You may
also apply for a "Schnupperaccount" (trial account) for one year to find out if the machine is
useful for your application.

An other able use case is to request resources for a courses.

To learn more about applying for a project or a course,
check the following page:
[https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/zugang][1]

## HPC-Login

### get access without an existing ZIH-Login

To use the resources, you need a [valid ZIH login][2]. To get a ZIH login and the
access to HPC you can use
[this Form][4].

### get access with a valid ZIH login

When you have a valid ZIH login, there are two possibilities for you: Either the manager or
administrator of a HPC project needs to add you as a member of this project via the
[manager view][3], or you have to [apply for a project](project_request_form.md). 

## Acknowledgment in Publications

To provide you with modern and powerful HPC systems in future as well,
we have to show that these systems help to advance research.
For that purpose we rely on your help.
In most cases, the results of your computations are used for
presentations and publications, especially in peer-reviewed
magazines, journals, and conference proceedings.
We kindly ask you to mention the HPC resource usage in the acknowledgment
section of all publications that are based on granted HPC resources of the TU Dresden.

Examples:

- The authors gratefully acknowledge the GWK support for funding
  this project by providing computing time through the Center
  for Information Services and HPC (ZIH) at TU Dresden.

- The authors are grateful to the Center for Information Services
  and High Performance Computing [Zentrum fuer Informationsdienste
  und Hochleistungsrechnen (ZIH)] at TU Dresden for providing
  its facilities for high throughput calculations.

Please send us references of appeared publications, so that
we can refer to them in the context of follow-up applications
for the procurement of infrastructure!

[1]: https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/zugang
[2]: https://tu-dresden.de/zih/dienste/service-katalog/zugangsvoraussetzung
[3]: https://doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/application/project_management/#manage-project-members-dis-enable
[4]: https://selfservice.zih.tu-dresden.de/l/index.php/hpclogin

Commit message:

Link zur Publications-Anleitung um Doppelpflege zu vermeiden

doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/application/overview.md, after:

# Application for Login and Resources

In order to use the ZIH systems installed at ZIH, a project application form has to be filled in.
The HPC project manager should hold a professorship (university) or head a research group. You may
also apply for a "Schnupperaccount" (trial account) for one year to find out if the machine is
useful for your application.

An other able use case is to request resources for a courses.

To learn more about applying for a project or a course,
check the following page:
[https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/zugang][1]

## HPC-Login

### get access without an existing ZIH-Login

To use the resources, you need a [valid ZIH login][2]. To get a ZIH login and the
access to HPC you can use
[this Form][4].

### get access with a valid ZIH login

When you have a valid ZIH login, there are two possibilities for you: Either the manager or
administrator of a HPC project needs to add you as a member of this project via the
[manager view][3], or you have to [apply for a project](project_request_form.md). 

## Acknowledgment in Publications

We kindly ask you to mention the HPC resource usage in the acknowledgment
section of all publications that are based on granted HPC resources of the TU Dresden.

how this can be done you can look up on [this page][4]

[1]: https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/zugang
[2]: https://tu-dresden.de/zih/dienste/service-katalog/zugangsvoraussetzung
[3]: https://doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/application/project_management/#manage-project-members-dis-enable
[4]: https://selfservice.zih.tu-dresden.de/l/index.php/hpclogin
[5]: https://tu-dresden.de/zih/hochleistungsrechnen/zugang/projektantrag#section-4
