doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/software/vampir.md, before:

# Vampir

## Introduction

Vampir is a graphical analysis framework that provides a large set of different chart
representations of event based performance data generated through program instrumentation. These
graphical displays, including state diagrams, statistics, and timelines, can be used by developers
to obtain a better understanding of their parallel program inner working and to subsequently
optimize it. Vampir allows to focus on appropriate levels of detail, which allows the detection and
explanation of various performance bottlenecks such as load imbalances and communication
deficiencies. [ZIH's Vampir overview page
](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir) gives
further information.

[Score-P](scorep.md) is the primary code instrumentation and run-time measurement framework for
Vampir and supports various instrumentation methods, including instrumentation at source level and
at compile/link time. The tool supports trace files in Open Trace Format (OTF, OTF2) that is
developed by ZIH and its partners and is especially designed for massively parallel programs.

![Vampir Framework](misc/vampir-framework.png)
{: align="center"}

## Starting Vampir

Prior to using Vampir you need to set up the correct environment on one
the HPC systems with:

```console
marie@login$ module load Vampir
```

For members of TU Dresden the Vampir tool is also available as
[download](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir/vampir_download_tu)
for installation on your personal computer.

Make sure, that compressed display forwarding (e.g., `ssh -YC taurus`) is
enabled. Start the GUI by typing

```console
marie@login$ vampir
```

on your command line or by double-clicking the Vampir icon on your personal computer.

Please consult the
[Vampir user manual](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir/dateien/Vampir-User-Manual.pdf)
for a tutorial on using the tool.

## Using VampirServer

VampirServer provides additional scalable analysis capabilities to the Vampir GUI mentioned above.
To use VampirServer on the ZIH Systems proceed as follows: start the Vampir GUI as
described above and use the *Open Remote* dialog with the parameters indicated in the following
figure to start and connect a VampirServer already instance running on the HPC system. Make sure
to fill in your personal ZIH login name.

![Vampir Open Remote dialog](misc/vampir-open-remote-dialog.png)
{: align="center"}

Click on the *Connect* button and wait until the connection is established. Enter your password when
requested. Depending on the available resources on the target system, this setup can take some time.
Please be patient and take a look at available resources beforehand.

## Advanced Usage

### Manual Server Startup

VampirServer is a parallel MPI program, which should be started by typing:

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver start
Launching VampirServer...
Submitting slurm 30 minutes job (this might take a while)...
```

Above automatically allocates its resources via the respective batch system. If you want to start
VampirServer without a batch allocation or from inside an interactive allocation, use

```console
marie@compute$ vampirserver start srun
```

After scheduling this job the server prints out the port number it is serving on, like `Listen port:
30088`.

Connecting to the most recently started server can be achieved by entering `auto-detect` as *Setup
name* in the *Open Remote* dialog of Vampir.

![Vampir Open Remote Dialog (auto start)](misc/vampir-open-remote-dialog-auto-start.png)
{: align="center"}

Please make sure you stop VampirServer after finishing your work with
the front-end (*File* → *Shutdown Server...*) or with

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver stop
```

Type

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver help
```

for further information. The [user manual](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir/dateien/VampirServer-User-Manual.pdf)
of VampirServer can be found at `doc/vampirserver-manual.pdf` in the installation directory.
Type

```console
marie@login$ which vampirserver
```

to find the revision dependent *installation directory*.

### Port Forwarding

VampirServer listens to a given socket port. It is possible to forward
this port (SSH tunnel) to a remote machine. This procedure is not
recommended and not needed at ZIH. However, the following example shows
the tunneling to a VampirServer on a compute node.

Start VampirServer on the ZIH system and wait for its scheduling:

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver start
Launching VampirServer...
Submitting slurm 30 minutes job (this might take a while)...
salloc: Granted job allocation 2753510
VampirServer 8.1.0 (r8451)
Licensed to ZIH, TU Dresden
Running 4 analysis processes... (abort with vampirserver stop 594)
VampirServer <594> listens on: taurusi1253:30055
```

Or choose from an already running VampirServer:

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver list
594 taurusi1253:30055 [4x, slurm]
```

Open a second console on your local computer and establish an SSH tunnel to the compute node with:

```console
marie@local$ ssh -L 30000:taurusi1253:30055 taurus
```

!!! important "SSH command"

    The previous SSH command requires that you have already set up your [SSH configuration
    ](../access/ssh_login.md#configuring-default-parameters-for-ssh).

Now, the port 30000 on your desktop is connected to the VampirServer port 30055 at the compute node
`taurusi1253` of the ZIH system. Finally, start your local Vampir client and establish a remote
connection to `localhost`, port 30000 as described in the manual.

```console
marie@local$ vampir
```

**Remark:** Please substitute the ports given in this example with appropriate numbers and available
ports based on the output from `vampirserver start` or `vampirserver list`.

### Nightly Builds (unstable)

Expert users who subscribed to the development program can test new, unstable tool features. The
corresponding Vampir and VampirServer software releases are provided as nightly builds. Unstable
versions of VampirServer are also installed on the HPC systems. The most recent version can be
launched/connected by entering `unstable` as *Setup name* in the *Open Remote* dialog of Vampir.

![Vampir Open Remote Dialog (unstable)](misc/vampir-open-remote-dialog-unstable.png)
{: align="center"}

Commit message:

Fix the fix, something went wrong with resolving the thread

doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/software/vampir.md, after:

# Vampir

## Introduction

Vampir is a graphical analysis framework that provides a large set of different chart
representations of event based performance data generated through program instrumentation. These
graphical displays, including state diagrams, statistics, and timelines, can be used by developers
to obtain a better understanding of their parallel program inner working and to subsequently
optimize it. Vampir allows to focus on appropriate levels of detail, which allows the detection and
explanation of various performance bottlenecks such as load imbalances and communication
deficiencies. [ZIH's Vampir overview page
](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir) gives
further information.

[Score-P](scorep.md) is the primary code instrumentation and run-time measurement framework for
Vampir and supports various instrumentation methods, including instrumentation at source level and
at compile/link time. The tool supports trace files in Open Trace Format (OTF, OTF2) that is
developed by ZIH and its partners and is especially designed for massively parallel programs.

![Vampir Framework](misc/vampir-framework.png)
{: align="center"}

## Starting Vampir

Prior to using Vampir you need to set up the correct environment on one
the HPC systems with:

```console
marie@login$ module load Vampir
```

For members of TU Dresden the Vampir tool is also available as
[download](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir/vampir_download_tu)
for installation on your personal computer.

Make sure, that compressed display forwarding (e.g., `ssh -YC taurus`) is
enabled. Start the GUI by typing

```console
marie@login$ vampir
```

on your command line or by double-clicking the Vampir icon on your personal computer.

Please consult the
[Vampir user manual](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir/dateien/Vampir-User-Manual.pdf)
for a tutorial on using the tool.

## Using VampirServer

VampirServer provides additional scalable analysis capabilities to the Vampir GUI mentioned above.
To use VampirServer on the ZIH Systems proceed as follows: start the Vampir GUI as
described above and use the *Open Remote* dialog with the parameters indicated in the following
figure to start and connect a VampirServer already instance running on the HPC system. Make sure
to fill in your personal ZIH login name.

![Vampir Open Remote dialog](misc/vampir-open-remote-dialog.png)
{: align="center"}

Click on the *Connect* button and wait until the connection is established. Enter your password when
requested. Depending on the available resources on the target system, this setup can take some time.
Please be patient and take a look at available resources beforehand.

## Advanced Usage

### Manual Server Startup

VampirServer is a parallel MPI program, which should be started by typing:

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver start
Launching VampirServer...
Submitting slurm 30 minutes job (this might take a while)...
```

This way, a job with a timelimit of 30 minutes and default resources is submitted. This might fit your needs. If not, please feel free to request a customized job running VampirServer, e.g.

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver start --ntasks 8 -- --time=01:00:00 -- --mem-per-cpu=3000M --partition=romeo
Launching VampirServer...
Submitting slurm 01:00:00 minutes job (this might take a while)...
```

Above automatically allocates its resources via the respective batch system. If you want to start

VampirServer without a batch allocation or from inside an interactive allocation, use

```console
marie@compute$ vampirserver start srun
```

After scheduling this job the server prints out the port number it is serving on, like `Listen port:
30088`.

Connecting to the most recently started server can be achieved by entering `auto-detect` as *Setup
name* in the *Open Remote* dialog of Vampir.

![Vampir Open Remote Dialog (auto start)](misc/vampir-open-remote-dialog-auto-start.png)
{: align="center"}

Please make sure you stop VampirServer after finishing your work with
the front-end (*File* → *Shutdown Server...*) or with

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver stop
```

Type

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver help
```

for further information. The [user manual](http://tu-dresden.de/die_tu_dresden/zentrale_einrichtungen/zih/forschung/projekte/vampir/dateien/VampirServer-User-Manual.pdf)
of VampirServer can be found at `doc/vampirserver-manual.pdf` in the installation directory.
Type

```console
marie@login$ which vampirserver
```

to find the revision dependent *installation directory*.

### Port Forwarding

VampirServer listens to a given socket port. It is possible to forward
this port (SSH tunnel) to a remote machine. This procedure is not
recommended and not needed at ZIH. However, the following example shows
the tunneling to a VampirServer on a compute node.

Start VampirServer on the ZIH system and wait for its scheduling:

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver start
Launching VampirServer...
Submitting slurm 30 minutes job (this might take a while)...
salloc: Granted job allocation 2753510
VampirServer 8.1.0 (r8451)
Licensed to ZIH, TU Dresden
Running 4 analysis processes... (abort with vampirserver stop 594)
VampirServer <594> listens on: taurusi1253:30055
```

Or choose from an already running VampirServer:

```console
marie@login$ vampirserver list
594 taurusi1253:30055 [4x, slurm]
```

Open a second console on your local computer and establish an SSH tunnel to the compute node with:

```console
marie@local$ ssh -L 30000:taurusi1253:30055 taurus
```

!!! important "SSH command"

    The previous SSH command requires that you have already set up your [SSH configuration
    ](../access/ssh_login.md#configuring-default-parameters-for-ssh).

Now, the port 30000 on your desktop is connected to the VampirServer port 30055 at the compute node
`taurusi1253` of the ZIH system. Finally, start your local Vampir client and establish a remote
connection to `localhost`, port 30000 as described in the manual.

```console
marie@local$ vampir
```

**Remark:** Please substitute the ports given in this example with appropriate numbers and available
ports based on the output from `vampirserver start` or `vampirserver list`.

### Nightly Builds (unstable)

Expert users who subscribed to the development program can test new, unstable tool features. The
corresponding Vampir and VampirServer software releases are provided as nightly builds. Unstable
versions of VampirServer are also installed on the HPC systems. The most recent version can be
launched/connected by entering `unstable` as *Setup name* in the *Open Remote* dialog of Vampir.

![Vampir Open Remote Dialog (unstable)](misc/vampir-open-remote-dialog-unstable.png)
{: align="center"}
