doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/jobs_and_resources/architecture_2023.md, before:

# Architectural Re-Design 2023

With the replacement of the Taurus system by the cluster `Barnard` in 2023,
the rest of the installed hardware had to be re-connected, both with
Infiniband and with Ethernet.

![Architecture overview 2023](../jobs_and_resources/misc/architecture_2023.png)
{: align=center}

## Compute Systems

All compute clusters now act as separate entities having their own
login nodes of the same hardware and their very own Slurm batch systems. The different hardware,
e.g. Romeo and Alpha Centauri, is no longer managed via a single Slurm instance with
corresponding partitions. Instead, you as user now chose the hardware by the choice of the
correct login node.

The login nodes can be used for smaller interactive jobs on the clusters. There are
restrictions in place, though, wrt. usable resources and time per user. For larger
computations, please use interactive jobs.

## Storage Systems

### Permananent Filesystems

We now have `/home`, `/projects` and `/software` in a Lustre filesystem. Snapshots
and tape backup are configured. For convenience, we will make the old home available
read-only as `/home_old` on the data mover nodes for the data migration period.

`/warm_archive` is mounted on the data movers, only.

### Work Filesystems

With new players with new software in the filesystem market it is getting more and more
complicated to identify the best suited filesystem for temporary data. In many cases,
only tests can provide the right answer, for a short time.

For an easier grasp on the major categories (size, speed), the work filesystems now come
with the names of animals:

* `/data/horse` - 20 PB - high bandwidth (Lustre)
* `/data/octopus` - 0.5 PB - for interactive usage (Lustre)
* `/data/weasel` - 1 PB - for high IOPS (WEKA)  - coming soon

### Difference Between "Work" And "Permanent"

A large number of changing files is a challenge for any backup system. To protect
our snapshots and backup from work data,
`/projects` cannot be used for temporary data on the compute nodes - it is mounted read-only.

Please use our data mover mechanisms to transfer worthy data to permanent
storages.

## Migration Phase

For about one month, the new cluster Barnard, and the old cluster Taurus
will run side-by-side - both with their respective filesystems.

Commit message:

Add link to migration page

doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/jobs_and_resources/architecture_2023.md, after:

# Architectural Re-Design 2023

With the replacement of the Taurus system by the cluster `Barnard` in 2023,
the rest of the installed hardware had to be re-connected, both with
Infiniband and with Ethernet.

![Architecture overview 2023](../jobs_and_resources/misc/architecture_2023.png)
{: align=center}

## Compute Systems

All compute clusters now act as separate entities having their own
login nodes of the same hardware and their very own Slurm batch systems. The different hardware,
e.g. Romeo and Alpha Centauri, is no longer managed via a single Slurm instance with
corresponding partitions. Instead, you as user now chose the hardware by the choice of the
correct login node.

The login nodes can be used for smaller interactive jobs on the clusters. There are
restrictions in place, though, wrt. usable resources and time per user. For larger
computations, please use interactive jobs.

## Storage Systems

### Permananent Filesystems

We now have `/home`, `/projects` and `/software` in a Lustre filesystem. Snapshots
and tape backup are configured. For convenience, we will make the old home available
read-only as `/home_old` on the data mover nodes for the data migration period.

`/warm_archive` is mounted on the data movers, only.

### Work Filesystems

With new players with new software in the filesystem market it is getting more and more
complicated to identify the best suited filesystem for temporary data. In many cases,
only tests can provide the right answer, for a short time.

For an easier grasp on the major categories (size, speed), the work filesystems now come
with the names of animals:

* `/data/horse` - 20 PB - high bandwidth (Lustre)
* `/data/octopus` - 0.5 PB - for interactive usage (Lustre)
* `/data/weasel` - 1 PB - for high IOPS (WEKA)  - coming soon

### Difference Between "Work" And "Permanent"

A large number of changing files is a challenge for any backup system. To protect
our snapshots and backup from work data,
`/projects` cannot be used for temporary data on the compute nodes - it is mounted read-only.

Please use our data mover mechanisms to transfer worthy data to permanent
storages.

## Migration Phase

For about one month, the new cluster Barnard, and the old cluster Taurus
will run side-by-side - both with their respective filesystems. You can find a comprehensive
[description of the migration phase here](migration_2023.md).
