# Checkpoint/Restart

If you wish to do checkpointing, your first step should always be to
check if your application already has such capabilities built-in, as
that is the most stable and safe way of doing it. Applications that are
known to have some sort of **native checkpointing** include:

Abaqus, Amber, Gaussian, GROMACS, LAMMPS, NAMD, NWChem, Quantum
Espresso, STAR-CCM+, VASP

In case your program does not natively support checkpointing, there are
attempts at creating generic checkpoint/restart solutions that should
work application-agnostic. One such project which we recommend is DMTCP:
[Distributed MultiThreaded CheckPointing](<http://dmtcp.sourceforge.net>).

It is available on ZIH systems after having loaded the "dmtcp" module:

```console
marie@login$ module load DMTCP
```

While our batch system of choice, Slurm, also provides a checkpointing
interface to the user, unfortunately, it does not yet support DMTCP at
this time. However, there are ongoing efforts of writing a Slurm plugin
that hopefully will change this in the near future. We will update this
documentation as soon as it becomes available.

In order to help with setting up checkpointing for your jobs, we have
written a few scripts that make it easier to utilize DMTCP together with
Slurm on our cluster.

## Using our [Chain-Job](../jobs_and_resources/slurm.md#chain-jobs) Script

For long-running jobs that you wish to split into multiple shorter jobs,
thereby enabling the job scheduler to fill the cluster much more
efficiently and also providing some level of fault-tolerance, we have
written a script that automatically creates a number of jobs for your
desired runtime and adds the checkpoint/restart bits transparently to
your batch script. You just have to specify the targeted total runtime
of your calculation and the interval in which you wish to do
checkpoints. The latter (plus the time it takes to write the checkpoint)
will then be the runtime of the individual jobs. This should be targeted
at below 24 hours in order to be able to run on all of our
[haswell64 partitions](../jobs_and_resources/system_taurus.md#run-time-limits),
for increased fault-tolerance, it can be chosen even shorter.

To use it, first add a `dmtcp_launch` before your application call in
your batch script. In the case of MPI applications, you have to add the
parameters `--ib --rm` and put it between srun and your application
call, e.g.:

```bash
srun dmtcp_launch --ib --rm ./my-mpi-application
```

!!! note
    We have successfully tested checkpointing MPI applications with
    the latest `Intel MPI` (module: intelmpi/2018.0.128). While it might
    work with other MPI libraries, too, we have no experience in this
    regard, so you should always try it out before using it for your
    productive jobs.

Then just substitute your usual `sbatch` call with `dmtcp_sbatch` and be
sure to specify the `-t` and `-i` parameters (don't forget you need to
have loaded the dmtcp module).

```console
marie@login$ dmtcp_sbatch --time 2-00:00:00 --interval 28000,800 my_batchfile.sh
```

With `-t|--time` you set the total runtime of your calculation overall
jobs. This will be replaced in the batch script in order to shorten your
individual jobs.

The parameter `-i|--interval` sets the time in seconds for your
checkpoint intervals. It can optionally include a timeout for writing
out the checkpoint files, separated from the interval time via comma
(defaults to 10 minutes).

In the above example, there will be 6 jobs each running 8 hours, so
about 2 days in total.

!!! Hints

    -   If you see your first job running into the timelimit, that probably 
    means the timeout for writing out checkpoint files does not suffice
    and should be increased. Our tests have shown that it takes
    approximately 5 minutes to write out the memory content of a fully
    utilized 64GB haswell node, so you should choose at least 10 minutes
    there (better err on the side of caution). Your mileage may vary,
    depending on how much memory your application uses. If your memory
    content is rather incompressible, it might be a good idea to disable
    the checkpoint file compression by setting: `export DMTCP_GZIP=0`
    -   Note that all jobs the script deems necessary for your chosen
    timelimit/interval values are submitted right when first calling the
    script. If your applications take considerably less time than what
    you specified, some of the individual jobs will be unnecessary. As
    soon as one job does not find a checkpoint to resume from, it will
    cancel all subsequent jobs for you.
    -   See `dmtcp_sbatch -h` for a list of available parameters and more help

What happens in your work directory?

-   The script will create subdirectories named `ckpt_<jobid>` for each
    individual job it puts into the queue
-   It will also create modified versions of your batch script, one for
    the first job (`ckpt_launch.job`), one for the middle parts
    (`ckpt_rstr.job`) and one for the final job (`cpkt_rstr_last.job`)
-   Inside the `ckpt_*` directories you will also find a file
    (`job_ids`) containing all job ids that are related to this job
    chain

If you wish to restart manually from one of your checkpoints (e.g., if
something went wrong in your later jobs or the jobs vanished from
the queue for some reason), you have to call `dmtcp_sbatch` with the
`-r|--resume` parameter, specifying a cpkt\_\* directory to resume from.
Then it will use the same parameters as in the initial run of this job
chain. If you wish to adjust the time limit, for instance, because you
realized that your original limit was too short, just use the
`-t|--time` parameter again on resume.

## Using DMTCP manually

If for some reason our automatic chain job script is not suitable for
your use case, you could also just use DMTCP on its own. In the
following we will give you step-by-step instructions on how to
checkpoint your job manually: 1 Load the dmtcp module:
`module load dmtcp` 1 DMTCP usually runs an additional process that
manages the creation of checkpoints and such, the so-called
`coordinator`. It must be started in your batch script before the actual
start of your application. To help you with this process, we have
created a bash function called `start_coordinator` that is available
after sourcing `$DMTCP_ROOT/bin/bash` in your script. The coordinator
can take a handful of parameters, see `man dmtcp_coordinator`. Via `-i`
you can specify an interval (in seconds) in which checkpoint files are
to be created automatically. With `--exit-after-ckpt` the application
will be terminated after the first checkpoint has been created, which
can be useful if you wish to implement some sort of job chaining on your
own. 1 In front of your program call, you have to add the wrapper
script: `dmtcp_launch` **TODO check**

???+ example

    ```bash
    #/bin/bash 
    #SBATCH --time=00:01:00
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=8 
    #SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=1500

    source $DMTCP_ROOT/bin/bash start_coordinator -i 40 --exit-after-ckpt

    dmtcp_launch ./my-application #for sequential/multithreaded applications
    #or: srun dmtcp_launch --ib --rm ./my-mpi-application #for MPI
    applications
    ```

This will create a checkpoint automatically after 40 seconds and then
terminate your application and with it the job. If the job runs into its
timelimit (here: 60 seconds), the time to write out the checkpoint was
probably not long enough. If all went well, you should find cpkt\* files
in your work directory together with a script called
`./dmtcp_restart_script.sh` that can be used to resume from the
checkpoint. 1 To restart your application, you need another batch file
(similar to the one above) where once again you first have to start the
DMTCP coordinator. The requested resources should match those of your
original job. If you do not wish to create another checkpoint in your
restarted run again, you can omit the `-i` and `--exit-after-ckpt`
parameters this time. Afterwards, the application must be run using the
restart script, specifying the host and port of the coordinator (they
have been exported by the start_coordinator function).

???+ example

    ```bash
    #/bin/bash 
    #SBATCH --time=00:01:00 
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=8
    #SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=1500

    source $DMTCP_ROOT/bin/bash start_coordinator -i 40 --exit-after-ckpt

    ./dmtcp_restart_script.sh -h $DMTCP_COORD_HOST -p
    $DMTCP_COORD_PORT
    ```
