doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/jobs_and_resources/rome_nodes.md, before:

# Island 7 - AMD Rome Nodes

## Hardware

- Slurm partition: `romeo`
- Module architecture: `rome`
- 192 nodes `taurusi[7001-7192]`, each:
    - 2x AMD EPYC CPU 7702 (64 cores) @ 2.0GHz, Simultaneous Multithreading (SMT)
    - 512 GB RAM
    - 200 GB SSD disk mounted on `/tmp`

## Usage

There is a total of 128 physical cores in each node. SMT is also active, so in total, 256 logical
cores are available per node.

!!! note

    Multithreading is disabled per default in a job. To make use of it include the Slurm parameter
    `--hint=multithread` in your job script or command line, or set the environment variable
    `SLURM_HINT=multithread` before job submission.

Each node brings 512 GB of main memory, so you can request roughly 1972 MB per logical core (using
`--mem-per-cpu`). Note that you will always get the memory for the logical core sibling too, even if
you do not intend to use SMT.

!!! note

    If you are running a job here with only ONE process (maybe multiple cores), please explicitly
    set the option `-n 1`!

Be aware that software built with Intel compilers and `-x*` optimization flags will not run on those
AMD processors! That's why most older modules built with Intel toolchains are not available on
partition `romeo`.

We provide the script `ml_arch_avail` that can be used to check if a certain module is available on
`rome` architecture.

## Example, running CP2K on Rome

First, check what CP2K modules are available in general:
`module spider CP2K` or `module avail CP2K`.

You will see that there are several different CP2K versions avail, built with different toolchains.
Now let's assume you have to decided you want to run CP2K version 6 at least, so to check if those
modules are built for rome, use:

```console
marie@login$ ml_arch_avail CP2K/6
CP2K/6.1-foss-2019a: haswell, rome
CP2K/6.1-foss-2019a-spglib: haswell, rome
CP2K/6.1-intel-2018a: sandy, haswell
CP2K/6.1-intel-2018a-spglib: haswell
```

There you will see that only the modules built with toolchain `foss` are available on architecture
`rome`, not the ones built with `intel`. So you can load, e.g. `ml CP2K/6.1-foss-2019a`.

Then, when writing your batch script, you have to specify the partition `romeo`. Also, if e.g. you
wanted to use an entire ROME node (no SMT) and fill it with MPI ranks, it could look like this:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --partition=romeo
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=128
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=1972

srun cp2k.popt input.inp
```

## Using the Intel Toolchain on Rome

Currently, we have only newer toolchains starting at `intel/2019b` installed for the Rome nodes.
Even though they have AMD CPUs, you can still use the Intel compilers on there and they don't even
create bad-performing code. When using the Intel Math Kernel Library (MKL) up to version 2019,
though, you should set the following environment variable to make sure that AVX2 is used:

```bash
export MKL_DEBUG_CPU_TYPE=5
```

Without it, the MKL does a CPUID check and disables AVX2/FMA on non-Intel CPUs, leading to much
worse performance.

!!! note

    In version 2020 and above, Intel has removed this environment variable and added separate Zen codepaths
    to the library. However, they are still incomplete and do not cover every BLAS function. Also, the
    Intel AVX2 codepaths still seem to provide somewhat better performance, so a new workaround
    would be to overwrite the `mkl_serv_intel_cpu_true` symbol with a custom function:

```c
int mkl_serv_intel_cpu_true() {
    return 1;
}
```

and preloading this in a library:

```console
marie@login$ gcc -shared -fPIC -o libfakeintel.so fakeintel.c
marie@login$ export LD_PRELOAD=libfakeintel.so
```

As for compiler optimization flags, `-xHOST` does not seem to produce best-performing code in every
case on Rome. You might want to try `-mavx2 -fma` instead.

### Intel MPI

We have seen only half the theoretical peak bandwidth via Infiniband between two nodes, whereas
OpenMPI got close to the peak bandwidth, so you might want to avoid using Intel MPI on partition
`rome` if your application heavily relies on MPI communication until this issue is resolved.

Commit message:

Review hardware documentation pages
* Resolve issue #434
* Remove hardware documentation section from specific pages of SD Flex,
  Alpha Centauri and Rome nodes, because it is error-prone to have this
  documentation in two places. The specific pages better cover the
  usage.
* Fix typos and adjust whitespaces before units
* Some linting of markdown text

doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/jobs_and_resources/rome_nodes.md, after:

# Island 7 - AMD Rome Nodes

The up-to-date hardware documentation is provided at
[this site](hardware_overview.md#island-7-amd-rome-cpus).

## Usage

There is a total of 128 physical cores in each node. SMT is also active, so in total, 256 logical
cores are available per node.

!!! note

    Multithreading is disabled per default in a job. To make use of it include the Slurm parameter
    `--hint=multithread` in your job script or command line, or set the environment variable
    `SLURM_HINT=multithread` before job submission.

Each node brings 512 GB of main memory, so you can request roughly 1972 MB per logical core (using
`--mem-per-cpu`). Note that you will always get the memory for the logical core sibling too, even if
you do not intend to use SMT.

!!! note

    If you are running a job here with only ONE process (maybe multiple cores), please explicitly
    set the option `-n 1`!

Be aware that software built with Intel compilers and `-x*` optimization flags will not run on those
AMD processors! That's why most older modules built with Intel toolchains are not available on
partition `romeo`.

We provide the script `ml_arch_avail` that can be used to check if a certain module is available on
`rome` architecture.

## Example, running CP2K on Rome

First, check what CP2K modules are available in general:
`module spider CP2K` or `module avail CP2K`.

You will see that there are several different CP2K versions avail, built with different toolchains.
Now let's assume you have to decided you want to run CP2K version 6 at least, so to check if those
modules are built for rome, use:

```console
marie@login$ ml_arch_avail CP2K/6
CP2K/6.1-foss-2019a: haswell, rome
CP2K/6.1-foss-2019a-spglib: haswell, rome
CP2K/6.1-intel-2018a: sandy, haswell
CP2K/6.1-intel-2018a-spglib: haswell
```

There you will see that only the modules built with toolchain `foss` are available on architecture
`rome`, not the ones built with `intel`. So you can load, e.g. `ml CP2K/6.1-foss-2019a`.

Then, when writing your batch script, you have to specify the partition `romeo`. Also, if e.g. you
wanted to use an entire ROME node (no SMT) and fill it with MPI ranks, it could look like this:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --partition=romeo
#SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=128
#SBATCH --nodes=1
#SBATCH --mem-per-cpu=1972

srun cp2k.popt input.inp
```

## Using the Intel Toolchain on Rome

Currently, we have only newer toolchains starting at `intel/2019b` installed for the Rome nodes.
Even though they have AMD CPUs, you can still use the Intel compilers on there and they don't even
create bad-performing code. When using the Intel Math Kernel Library (MKL) up to version 2019,
though, you should set the following environment variable to make sure that AVX2 is used:

```bash
export MKL_DEBUG_CPU_TYPE=5
```

Without it, the MKL does a CPUID check and disables AVX2/FMA on non-Intel CPUs, leading to much
worse performance.

!!! note

    In version 2020 and above, Intel has removed this environment variable and added separate Zen codepaths
    to the library. However, they are still incomplete and do not cover every BLAS function. Also, the
    Intel AVX2 codepaths still seem to provide somewhat better performance, so a new workaround
    would be to overwrite the `mkl_serv_intel_cpu_true` symbol with a custom function:

```c
int mkl_serv_intel_cpu_true() {
    return 1;
}
```

and preloading this in a library:

```console
marie@login$ gcc -shared -fPIC -o libfakeintel.so fakeintel.c
marie@login$ export LD_PRELOAD=libfakeintel.so
```

As for compiler optimization flags, `-xHOST` does not seem to produce best-performing code in every
case on Rome. You might want to try `-mavx2 -fma` instead.

### Intel MPI

We have seen only half the theoretical peak bandwidth via Infiniband between two nodes, whereas
OpenMPI got close to the peak bandwidth, so you might want to avoid using Intel MPI on partition
`rome` if your application heavily relies on MPI communication until this issue is resolved.
