doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/jobs_and_resources/sd_flex.md, before:

# HPE Superdome Flex

The HPE Superdome Flex is a large shared memory node. It is especially well suited for data
intensive application scenarios, for example to process extremely large data sets completely in main
memory or in very fast NVMe memory.

## Configuration Details

- Hostname: `taurussmp8`
- Access to all shared filesystems
- Slurm partition `julia`
- 32 x Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8276M CPU @ 2.20GHz (28 cores)
- 48 TB RAM (usable: 47 TB - one TB is used for cache coherence protocols)
- 370 TB of fast NVME storage available at `/nvme/<projectname>`

## Local Temporary NVMe Storage

There are 370 TB of NVMe devices installed. For immediate access for all projects, a volume of 87 TB
of fast NVMe storage is available at `/nvme/1/<projectname>`. A quota of
100 GB per project on this NVMe storage is set.

With a more detailed proposal to [hpcsupport@zih.tu-dresden.de](mailto:hpcsupport@zih.tu-dresden.de)
on how this unique system (large shared memory + NVMe storage) can speed up their computations, a
project's quota can be increased or dedicated volumes of up to the full capacity can be set up.

## Hints for Usage

- Granularity should be a socket (28 cores)
- Can be used for OpenMP applications with large memory demands
- To use OpenMPI it is necessary to export the following environment
  variables, so that OpenMPI uses shared memory instead of Infiniband
  for message transport. `export OMPI_MCA_pml=ob1;   export  OMPI_MCA_mtl=^mxm`
- Use `I_MPI_FABRICS=shm` so that Intel MPI doesn't even consider
  using Infiniband devices itself, but only shared-memory instead

Commit message:

Review hardware documentation pages
* Resolve issue #434
* Remove hardware documentation section from specific pages of SD Flex,
  Alpha Centauri and Rome nodes, because it is error-prone to have this
  documentation in two places. The specific pages better cover the
  usage.
* Fix typos and adjust whitespaces before units
* Some linting of markdown text

doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/jobs_and_resources/sd_flex.md, after:

# HPE Superdome Flex

The HPE Superdome Flex is a large shared memory node. It is especially well suited for data
intensive application scenarios, for example to process extremely large data sets completely in main
memory or in very fast NVMe memory.

The hardware configuration is documented on
[this site](hardware_overview.md#large-smp-system-hpe-superdome-flex).

## Local Temporary on NVMe Storage

There are 370 TB of NVMe devices installed. For immediate access for all projects, a volume of 87 TB
of fast NVMe storage is available at `/nvme/1/<projectname>`. A quota of
100 GB per project on this NVMe storage is set.

With a more detailed proposal to [hpcsupport@zih.tu-dresden.de](mailto:hpcsupport@zih.tu-dresden.de)
on how this unique system (large shared memory + NVMe storage) can speed up their computations, a
project's quota can be increased or dedicated volumes of up to the full capacity can be set up.

## Hints for Usage

- Granularity should be a socket (28 cores)
- Can be used for OpenMP applications with large memory demands
- To use OpenMPI it is necessary to export the following environment
  variables, so that OpenMPI uses shared-memory instead of Infiniband
  for message transport:

  ```
  export OMPI_MCA_pml=ob1
  export OMPI_MCA_mtl=^mxm
  ```

- Use `I_MPI_FABRICS=shm` so that Intel MPI doesn't even consider
  using Infiniband devices itself, but only shared-memory instead
