doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/data_lifecycle/workspaces.md, before:

# Workspaces

Storage systems differ in terms of capacity, streaming bandwidth, IOPS rate, etc. Price and
efficiency don't allow to have it all in one. That is why fast parallel filesystems at ZIH have
restrictions with regards to **age of files** and [quota](permanent.md#quotas). The mechanism of
workspaces enables users to better manage their HPC data.

The concept of workspaces is common and used at a large number of HPC centers.

!!! note

    A **workspace** is a directory, with an associated expiration date, created on behalf of a user
    in a certain filesystem.

Once the workspace has reached its expiration date, it gets moved to a hidden directory and enters a
grace period. Once the grace period ends, the workspace is deleted permanently. The maximum lifetime
of a workspace depends on the storage system. All workspaces can be extended a certain amount of
times.

!!! tip

    Use the faster filesystems if you need to write temporary data in your computations, and use
    the capacity oriented filesystems if you only need to read data for your computations. Please
    keep track of your data and move it to a capacity oriented filesystem after the end of your
    computations.

## Workspace Management

### List Available Filesystems

To list all available filesystems for using workspaces use:

```console
marie@login$ ws_find -l
Available filesystems:
scratch
warm_archive
ssd
beegfs_global0
```

### List Current Workspaces

To list all workspaces you currently own, use:

```console
marie@login$ ws_list
id: test-workspace
     workspace directory  : /scratch/ws/0/marie-test-workspace
     remaining time       : 89 days 23 hours
     creation time        : Thu Jul 29 10:30:04 2021
     expiration date      : Wed Oct 27 10:30:04 2021
     filesystem name      : scratch
     available extensions : 10
```

### Allocate a Workspace

To create a workspace in one of the listed filesystems use `ws_allocate`. It is necessary to specify
a unique name and the duration of the workspace.

```console
marie@login$ ws_allocate: [options] workspace_name duration

Options:
  -h [ --help]               produce help message
  -V [ --version ]           show version
  -d [ --duration ] arg (=1) duration in days
  -n [ --name ] arg          workspace name
  -F [ --filesystem ] arg    filesystem
  -r [ --reminder ] arg      reminder to be sent n days before expiration
  -m [ --mailaddress ] arg   mailaddress to send reminder to (works only with tu-dresden.de mails)
  -x [ --extension ]         extend workspace
  -u [ --username ] arg      username
  -g [ --group ]             group workspace
  -c [ --comment ] arg       comment
```

!!! example

    ```console
    marie@login$ ws_allocate -F scratch -r 7 -m marie.testuser@tu-dresden.de test-workspace 90
    Info: creating workspace.
    /scratch/ws/marie-test-workspace
    remaining extensions  : 10
    remaining time in days: 90
    ```

This will create a workspace with the name `test-workspace` on the `/scratch` filesystem for 90
days with an email reminder for 7 days before the expiration.

!!! Note

    Setting the reminder to `7` means you will get a reminder email on every day starting `7` days
    prior to expiration date.

### Extension of a Workspace

The lifetime of a workspace is finite and different filesystems (storage systems) have different
maximum durations. A workspace can be extended multiple times, depending on the filesystem.

| Filesystem (use with parameter `-F`) | Duration, days | Extensions | [Filesystem Feature](../jobs_and_resources/slurm.md#filesystem-features) | Remarks |
|:-------------------------------------|---------------:|-----------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------|
| `ssd`                                | 30             | 2          | `fs_lustre_ssd`                                                          | High-IOPS filesystem (`/lustre/ssd`, symbolic link: `/ssd`) on SSDs. |
| `beegfs_global0` (deprecated)        | 30             | 2          | `fs_beegfs_global0`                                                      | High-IOPS filesystem (`/beegfs/global0`) on NVMes. |
| `beegfs`                             | 30             | 2          | `fs_beegfs`                                                              | High-IOPS filesystem (`/beegfs`) on NVMes. |
| `scratch`                            | 100            | 10         | `fs_lustre_scratch2`                                                     | Scratch filesystem (`/lustre/ssd`, symbolic link: `/scratch`) with high streaming bandwidth, based on spinning disks |
| `warm_archive`                       | 365            | 2          | `fs_warm_archive_ws`                                                     | Capacity filesystem based on spinning disks |

Use the command `ws_extent` to extend your workspace:

```console
marie@login$ ws_extend -F scratch test-workspace 100
Info: extending workspace.
/scratch/ws/marie-test-workspace
remaining extensions  : 1
remaining time in days: 100
```

Mail reminder settings are retained.

!!! attention

    With the `ws_extend` command, a new duration for the workspace is set. The new duration is not
    added to the remaining lifetime!

This means when you extend a workspace that expires in 90 days with the command

```console
marie@login$ ws_extend -F scratch my-workspace 40
```

it will now expire in 40 days **not** 130 days.

### Send Reminder for Workspace Expiry Date

Send a calendar invitation by Email to ensure that the expiration date of a workspace is not
forgotten

```console
ws_send_ical -F scratch my-workspace -m marie.testuser@tu-dresden.de
```

### Deletion of a Workspace

To delete a workspace use the `ws_release` command. It is mandatory to specify the name of the
workspace and the filesystem in which it is located:

```console
marie@login$ ws_release -F <filesystem> <workspace name>
```

### Restoring Expired Workspaces

At expiration time your workspace will be moved to a special, hidden directory. For a month (in
warm_archive: 2 months), you can still restore your data into an existing workspace.

!!! warning

    When you release a workspace **by hand**, it will not receive a grace period and be
    **permanently deleted** the **next day**. The advantage of this design is that you can create
    and release workspaces inside jobs and not swamp the filesystem with data no one needs anymore
    in the hidden directories (when workspaces are in the grace period).

Use

```console
marie@login$ ws_restore -l -F scratch
```

to get a list of your expired workspaces, and then restore them like that into an existing, active
workspace 'new_ws':

```console
marie@login$ ws_restore -F scratch marie-test-workspace-1234567 new_ws
```

The expired workspace has to be specified by its full name as listed by `ws_restore -l`, including
username prefix and timestamp suffix (otherwise, it cannot be uniquely identified). The target
workspace, on the other hand, must be given with just its short name, as listed by `ws_list`,
without the username prefix.

Both workspaces must be on the same filesystem. The data from the old workspace will be moved into
a directory in the new workspace with the name of the old one. This means a fresh workspace works as
well as a workspace that already contains data.

## Linking Workspaces in HOME

It might be valuable to have links to personal workspaces within a certain directory, e.g., your
home directory. The command `ws_register DIR` will create and manage links to all personal
workspaces within in the directory `DIR`. Calling this command will do the following:

- The directory `DIR` will be created if necessary.
- Links to all personal workspaces will be managed:
    - Create links to all available workspaces if not already present.
    - Remove links to released workspaces.

**Remark**: An automatic update of the workspace links can be invoked by putting the command
`ws_register DIR` in your personal `shell` configuration file (e.g., `.bashrc`).

## How to use Workspaces

There are three typical options for the use of workspaces:

### Per-Job Storage

A batch job needs a directory for temporary data. This can be deleted afterwards.

!!! example "Use with Gaussian"

    ```
    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH --partition=haswell
    #SBATCH --time=96:00:00
    #SBATCH --nodes=1
    #SBATCH --ntasks=1
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=24

    module purge
    module load modenv/hiera
    module load Gaussian

    COMPUTE_DIR=gaussian_$SLURM_JOB_ID
    export GAUSS_SCRDIR=$(ws_allocate -F ssd $COMPUTE_DIR 7)
    echo $GAUSS_SCRDIR

    srun g16 inputfile.gjf logfile.log

    test -d $GAUSS_SCRDIR && rm -rf $GAUSS_SCRDIR/*
    ws_release -F ssd $COMPUTE_DIR
    ```

Likewise, other jobs can use temporary workspaces.

### Data for a Campaign

For a series of jobs or calculations that work on the same data, you should allocate a workspace
once, e.g., in `scratch` for 100 days:

```console
marie@login$ ws_allocate -F scratch my_scratchdata 100
Info: creating workspace.
/scratch/ws/marie-my_scratchdata
remaining extensions  : 2
remaining time in days: 99
```

You can grant your project group access rights:

```
chmod g+wrx /scratch/ws/marie-my_scratchdata
```

And verify it with:

```console
marie@login$ ls -la /scratch/ws/marie-my_scratchdata
total 8
drwxrwx--- 2 marie    hpcsupport 4096 Jul 10 09:03 .
drwxr-xr-x 5 operator adm        4096 Jul 10 09:01 ..
```

### Mid-Term Storage

For data that seldom changes but consumes a lot of space, the warm archive can be used. Note that
this is mounted read-only on the compute nodes, so you cannot use it as a work directory for your
jobs!

```console
marie@login$ ws_allocate -F warm_archive my_inputdata 365
/warm_archive/ws/marie-my_inputdata
remaining extensions  : 2
remaining time in days: 365
```

!!!Attention

    The warm archive is not built for billions of files. There
    is a quota for 100.000 files per group. Please archive data.

To see your active quota use

```console
marie@login$ qinfo quota /warm_archive/ws/
```

Note that the workspaces reside under the mountpoint `/warm_archive/ws/` and not `/warm_archive`
anymore.

## FAQ and Troubleshooting

**Q**: I am getting the error `Error: could not create workspace directory!`

**A**: Please check the "locale" setting of your SSH client. Some clients (e.g. the one from MacOSX)
set values that are not valid on our ZIH systems. You should overwrite `LC_CTYPE` and set it to a
valid locale value like `export LC_CTYPE=de_DE.UTF-8`.

A list of valid locales can be retrieved via `locale -a`. Please only use UTF8 (or plain) settings.
Avoid "iso" codepages!

**Q**: I am getting the error `Error: target workspace does not exist!` when trying to restore my
workspace.

**A**: The workspace you want to restore into is either not on the same filesystem or you used the
wrong name. Use only the short name that is listed after `id:` when using `ws_list`.

Commit message:

Add note on default workspace filesystem, polishing for consistency

doc.zih.tu-dresden.de/docs/data_lifecycle/workspaces.md, after:

# Workspaces

Storage systems differ in terms of capacity, streaming bandwidth, IOPS rate, etc. Price and
efficiency don't allow to have it all in one. That is why fast parallel filesystems at ZIH have
restrictions with regards to **age of files** and [quota](permanent.md#quotas). The mechanism of
workspaces enables users to better manage their HPC data.

The concept of workspaces is common and used at a large number of HPC centers.

!!! note

    A **workspace** is a directory, with an associated expiration date, created on behalf of a user
    in a certain filesystem.

Once the workspace has reached its expiration date, it gets moved to a hidden directory and enters a
grace period. Once the grace period ends, the workspace is deleted permanently. The maximum lifetime
of a workspace depends on the storage system. All workspaces can be extended a certain amount of
times.

!!! tip

    Use the faster filesystems if you need to write temporary data in your computations, and use
    the capacity oriented filesystems if you only need to read data for your computations. Please
    keep track of your data and move it to a capacity oriented filesystem after the end of your
    computations.

## Workspace Management

### List Available Filesystems

To list all available filesystems for using workspaces, use:

```console
marie@login$ ws_find -l
available filesystems:
scratch (default)
warm_archive
ssd
beegfs_global0
beegfs
```

!!! note "Default is `scratch`"

    The default filesystem is `scratch`. If you prefer another filesystem, provide the option `-F
    <fs>` to the workspace commands.

### List Current Workspaces

To list all workspaces you currently own, use:

```console
marie@login$ ws_list
id: test-workspace
     workspace directory  : /scratch/ws/0/marie-test-workspace
     remaining time       : 89 days 23 hours
     creation time        : Thu Jul 29 10:30:04 2021
     expiration date      : Wed Oct 27 10:30:04 2021
     filesystem name      : scratch
     available extensions : 10
```

### Allocate a Workspace

To create a workspace in one of the listed filesystems, use `ws_allocate`. It is necessary to
specify a unique name and the duration of the workspace.

```console
marie@login$ ws_allocate: [options] workspace_name duration

Options:
  -h [ --help]               produce help message
  -V [ --version ]           show version
  -d [ --duration ] arg (=1) duration in days
  -n [ --name ] arg          workspace name
  -F [ --filesystem ] arg    filesystem
  -r [ --reminder ] arg      reminder to be sent n days before expiration
  -m [ --mailaddress ] arg   mailaddress to send reminder to (works only with tu-dresden.de mails)
  -x [ --extension ]         extend workspace
  -u [ --username ] arg      username
  -g [ --group ]             group workspace
  -c [ --comment ] arg       comment
```

!!! example

    ```console
    marie@login$ ws_allocate -F scratch -r 7 -m marie.testuser@tu-dresden.de test-workspace 90
    Info: creating workspace.
    /scratch/ws/marie-test-workspace
    remaining extensions  : 10
    remaining time in days: 90
    ```

This will create a workspace with the name `test-workspace` on the `/scratch` filesystem for 90
days with an email reminder for 7 days before the expiration.

!!! Note

    Setting the reminder to `7` means you will get a reminder email on every day starting `7` days
    prior to expiration date.

### Extension of a Workspace

The lifetime of a workspace is finite and different filesystems (storage systems) have different
maximum durations. A workspace can be extended multiple times, depending on the filesystem.

| Filesystem (use with parameter `-F <fs>`) | Duration, days | Extensions | [Filesystem Feature](../jobs_and_resources/slurm.md#filesystem-features) | Remarks |
|:-------------------------------------|---------------:|-----------:|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------|
| `scratch` (default)                  | 100            | 10         | `fs_lustre_scratch2`                                                     | Scratch filesystem (`/lustre/ssd`, symbolic link: `/scratch`) with high streaming bandwidth, based on spinning disks |
| `ssd`                                | 30             | 2          | `fs_lustre_ssd`                                                          | High-IOPS filesystem (`/lustre/ssd`, symbolic link: `/ssd`) on SSDs. |
| `beegfs_global0` (deprecated)        | 30             | 2          | `fs_beegfs_global0`                                                      | High-IOPS filesystem (`/beegfs/global0`) on NVMes. |
| `beegfs`                             | 30             | 2          | `fs_beegfs`                                                              | High-IOPS filesystem (`/beegfs`) on NVMes. |
| `warm_archive`                       | 365            | 2          | `fs_warm_archive_ws`                                                     | Capacity filesystem based on spinning disks |
{: summary="Settings for Workspace Filesystem."}

Use the command `ws_extent` to extend your workspace:

```console
marie@login$ ws_extend -F scratch test-workspace 100
Info: extending workspace.
/scratch/ws/marie-test-workspace
remaining extensions  : 1
remaining time in days: 100
```

Mail reminder settings are retained.

!!! attention

    With the `ws_extend` command, a new duration for the workspace is set. The new duration is not
    added to the remaining lifetime!

This means when you extend a workspace that expires in 90 days with the command

```console
marie@login$ ws_extend -F scratch my-workspace 40
```

it will now expire in 40 days **not** 130 days.

### Send Reminder for Workspace Expiry Date

Send a calendar invitation by Email to ensure that the expiration date of a workspace is not
forgotten

```console
ws_send_ical -F scratch my-workspace -m marie.testuser@tu-dresden.de
```

### Deletion of a Workspace

To delete a workspace use the `ws_release` command. It is mandatory to specify the name of the
workspace and the filesystem in which it is located:

```console
marie@login$ ws_release -F <fs> <workspace name>
```

### Restoring Expired Workspaces

At expiration time your workspace will be moved to a special, hidden directory. For a month (in
warm_archive: 2 months), you can still restore your data into an existing workspace.

!!! warning

    When you release a workspace **by hand**, it will not receive a grace period and be
    **permanently deleted** the **next day**. The advantage of this design is that you can create
    and release workspaces inside jobs and not swamp the filesystem with data no one needs anymore
    in the hidden directories (when workspaces are in the grace period).

Use

```console
marie@login$ ws_restore -l -F scratch
```

to get a list of your expired workspaces, and then restore them like that into an existing, active
workspace 'new_ws':

```console
marie@login$ ws_restore -F scratch marie-test-workspace-1234567 new_ws
```

The expired workspace has to be specified by its full name as listed by `ws_restore -l`, including
username prefix and timestamp suffix (otherwise, it cannot be uniquely identified). The target
workspace, on the other hand, must be given with just its short name, as listed by `ws_list`,
without the username prefix.

Both workspaces must be on the same filesystem. The data from the old workspace will be moved into
a directory in the new workspace with the name of the old one. This means a fresh workspace works as
well as a workspace that already contains data.

## Linking Workspaces in HOME

It might be valuable to have links to personal workspaces within a certain directory, e.g., your
home directory. The command `ws_register DIR` will create and manage links to all personal
workspaces within in the directory `DIR`. Calling this command will do the following:

- The directory `DIR` will be created if necessary.
- Links to all personal workspaces will be managed:
    - Create links to all available workspaces if not already present.
    - Remove links to released workspaces.

**Remark**: An automatic update of the workspace links can be invoked by putting the command
`ws_register DIR` in your personal `shell` configuration file (e.g., `.bashrc`).

## How to use Workspaces

There are three typical options for the use of workspaces:

### Per-Job Storage

A batch job needs a directory for temporary data. This can be deleted afterwards.

!!! example "Use with Gaussian"

    ```
    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH --partition=haswell
    #SBATCH --time=96:00:00
    #SBATCH --nodes=1
    #SBATCH --ntasks=1
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=24

    module purge
    module load modenv/hiera
    module load Gaussian

    COMPUTE_DIR=gaussian_$SLURM_JOB_ID
    export GAUSS_SCRDIR=$(ws_allocate -F ssd $COMPUTE_DIR 7)
    echo $GAUSS_SCRDIR

    srun g16 inputfile.gjf logfile.log

    test -d $GAUSS_SCRDIR && rm -rf $GAUSS_SCRDIR/*
    ws_release -F ssd $COMPUTE_DIR
    ```

Likewise, other jobs can use temporary workspaces.

### Data for a Campaign

For a series of jobs or calculations that work on the same data, you should allocate a workspace
once, e.g., in `scratch` for 100 days:

```console
marie@login$ ws_allocate -F scratch my_scratchdata 100
Info: creating workspace.
/scratch/ws/marie-my_scratchdata
remaining extensions  : 2
remaining time in days: 99
```

You can grant your project group access rights:

```
chmod g+wrx /scratch/ws/marie-my_scratchdata
```

And verify it with:

```console
marie@login$ ls -la /scratch/ws/marie-my_scratchdata
total 8
drwxrwx--- 2 marie    hpcsupport 4096 Jul 10 09:03 .
drwxr-xr-x 5 operator adm        4096 Jul 10 09:01 ..
```

### Mid-Term Storage

For data that seldom changes but consumes a lot of space, the warm archive can be used. Note that
this is mounted read-only on the compute nodes, so you cannot use it as a work directory for your
jobs!

```console
marie@login$ ws_allocate -F warm_archive my_inputdata 365
/warm_archive/ws/marie-my_inputdata
remaining extensions  : 2
remaining time in days: 365
```

!!!Attention

    The warm archive is not built for billions of files. There
    is a quota for 100.000 files per group. Please archive data.

To see your active quota use

```console
marie@login$ qinfo quota /warm_archive/ws/
```

Note that the workspaces reside under the mountpoint `/warm_archive/ws/` and not `/warm_archive`
anymore.

## FAQ and Troubleshooting

**Q**: I am getting the error `Error: could not create workspace directory!`

**A**: Please check the "locale" setting of your SSH client. Some clients (e.g. the one from MacOSX)
set values that are not valid on our ZIH systems. You should overwrite `LC_CTYPE` and set it to a
valid locale value like `export LC_CTYPE=de_DE.UTF-8`.

A list of valid locales can be retrieved via `locale -a`. Please only use UTF8 (or plain) settings.
Avoid "iso" codepages!

**Q**: I am getting the error `Error: target workspace does not exist!` when trying to restore my
workspace.

**A**: The workspace you want to restore into is either not on the same filesystem or you used the
wrong name. Use only the short name that is listed after `id:` when using `ws_list`.
